BEEFY High-level docs (#320)
paritytech/grandpa-bridge-gadget: docs/beefy.md

**votes**. Votes are simply their signatures over a **Commitment**. A Commitment consists of a
**payload** (an opaque blob of bytes extracted from a block or state at that block, expected to be some
form of crypto accumulator (like Merkle Tree Hash or Merkle Mountain Range Root Hash)) and **block
number** from which this payload originates. Additionally Commitment contains BEEFY **validator
set id** at that particular block. Note the block is finalized, so there is no ambiguity despite
using block number instead of a hash. A collection of **votes**, or rather
a Commitment and a collection of signatures is going to be called **Signed Commitment**. A valid
(see later for the rules) Signed Commitment is also called a **BEEFY Justification** or
**BEEFY Finality Proof**. For more details on the actual data structures please see
[Data Formats](#2-data-formats).

A **round** is an attempt by BEEFY validators to produce BEEFY Justification. **Round number** is
simply defined as a block number the validators are voting for, or to be more precise, the
Commitment for that block number. Round ends when the next round is started or when we receive ALL

> expected votes from ALL validators.

Author: Hmm, good point. We should start the new round as soon as we get 2/3+1 votes, so the second part is redundant.

I've rephrased the whole sentence and added more clarity.

Regular nodes are expected to:
1. Receive & validate votes for the current round and broadcast them to their peers.
1. Receive & validate BEEFY Justifications and broadcast them to their peers.
1. Return BEEFY Justifications for [**Mandatory Blocks**](#3-round-selection) on demand.
1. Optionally return BEEFY Justifications for non-mandatory blocks on demand.

Validators are expected to additionally:
1. Produce & broadcast vote for the current round.

> Both kinds of actors are expected to fully participate in the protocol ONLY IF they believe they

Reviewer: So until they catch up they are fully passive?

Author: Correct. Added an extra sentence to emphasize that.

In other words, the round number should be the last mandatory block if it does not have
justification yet or the highest GRANDPA-finalized block, whose block number difference with
`best_beefy` block is a power of two. The mental model for round selection is to first finalize
the mandatory block and then to attempt to pick a block taking into account how fast BEEFY catches
up with GRANDPA. In case GRANDPA makes progress, but BEEFY seems to be lagging behind, validators
are changing rounds less often to increase the chance of concluding them.

As mentioned earlier, every time the node picks a new `round_number` (and validator casts a vote) it
ends the previous one, no matter if finality was reached (i.e. the round concluded) or not. Votes
for an inactive round should not be propagated.

Note that since BEEFY only votes for GRANDPA-finalized blocks, `session_start` here actually means:
"the latest session for which the start of is GRANDPA-finalized", i.e. block production might have
already progressed, but BEEFY needs to first finalize the mandatory block of the older session. See
[Catch up](#3-catch-up) for more details and also consult [Lean BEEFY](#2-lean-beefy).

> In a good networking conditions BEEFY may end up finalizing each and every block (if GRANDPA does

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
In good networking conditions BEEFY may end up finalizing each and every block (if GRANDPA does
```

the same). Practically, with short block times, it's going to be rare and might be excessive, so

> it's suggested for implementations to introduce a `min_delta` parameter which will limit the amount
> of started rounds. The affected component of the formula would be: `best_beefy + MAX(min_delta,

Reviewer: Initially I read this as multiple rounds being active at the same time, I suggest a reword for clarity:

```suggestion
it's suggested for implementations to introduce a `min_delta` parameter which will limit the frequency with which new rounds are started. The affected component of the formula would be: `best_beefy + MAX(min_delta,
```

Better heuristic from Al: in the next beefy round, consider the finalized blocks that
come after the last beefy-signed block, and select the one whose block number that can be divided
by 2 the most times.
(i.e it's forgiving if validators don't agree on neither best beefy block nor best grandpa block)

</details>

### Catch up

Every session is guaranteed to have at least one BEEFY-finalized block. However it also means
that the round at mandatory block must be concluded even though, a new session has already started
(i.e. the on-chain component has selected a new validator set and GRANDPA might have already
finalized the transition). In such case BEEFY must "catch up" the previous sessions and make sure to
conclude rounds for mandatory blocks. Note that older sessions must obviously be finalized by the
validator set at that point in time, not the latest/current one.

### Initial Sync

It's all rainbows and unicorns when the node is fully synced with the network. However during cold
startup it will have hard time determining the current round number. Because of that nodes that
are not fully synced should not participate in BEEFY protocol at all.

> During the sync we should make sure to also fetch BEEFY justifications for all mandatory blocks.

Reviewer: Why do we need justifications for all mandatory blocks? why not just the last mandatory from the current/previous session?

Author: We need to make sure that the validator sets are properly changing, so that BEEFY is kind of self-sufficient, i.e. each BEEFY validator set signs-off it's successor. Without that you would just jump in the middle and assume that the current validator set is indeed legit. While this should be ensured by GRANDPA, we should rather make sure that we don't need this assumption  and also be sure that each full node can serve any BEEFY light client (i.e. contains all mandatory justifications).

This can happen asynchronously, but validators, before starting to vote, need to be certain
about the last session that contains a concluded round on mandatory block in order to initiate the

> catch up procedure.

Reviewer: How does this happen?
Do nodes/validators just passively listen for votes for a while until they know about the last session that contains a concluded round on mandatory block?

Do we have a plan for handling > 1/3 validators in this state?

Author: No, a node should actively request BEEFY justifications for mandatory blocks from it's peers until it has all of them (i.e. full BEEFY-signed history of all validator set transitions).

If we have > 1/3 valdiators in that state, BEEFY will simply start falling back behind GRANDPA - i.e. the validators will be stuck at some mandatory round, not being able to collect enough votes, but when 2/3 + 1 get's fully synced (and also stuck on the same round) we should start seeing votes being produced, gossiped and eventually the round being concluded.

### Gossip

Nodes participating in BEEFY protocol are expected to gossip messages around. The protocol defines
following messages:

1. Votes for the current round,
2. BEEFY Justifications for recently concluded rounds,
3. BEEFY Justification for the latest mandatory block,

Each message is additionally associated with a **topic**, which can be either:
1. the round number (i.e. topic associated with a particular round),

> 2. or the global topic (independent from the rounds).

Reviewer: So to be clear, `votes for the current round` (1) use a _per-round specific topic_, while justifications (2&3) use the global topic?

Author: Yes. It's described in the per-message section below.

Round-specific topic should only be used to gossip the votes, other messages are gossiped
periodically on the global topic. Let's now dive into description of the messages.

- **Votes**
  - Votes are sent on the round-specific topic.
  - Vote is considered valid when:
    - The commitment matches local commitment.
    - The validator is part of the current validator set.
    - The signature is correct.

- **BEEFY Justification**
  - Justifications are sent on the global topic.
  - Justification is considered valid when:
    - It is for a recent (implementation specific) round or the latest mandatory round.
    - It has at least `2/3rd + 1` valid signatures.
    - Signatorees are part of the current validator set.
  - Mandatory justifications should be announced periodically (see also [Lean BEEFY](#2-lean-beefy)).

## Misbehavior

Similarily to other PoS protocols, BEEFY considers casting two different votes in the same round a
misbehavior. I.e. for a particular `round_number`, the validator produces signatures for 2 different
`Commitment`s and broadcasts them. This is called **equivocation**.

> On top of this, voting on an incorrect **payload** is considered a misbehavior as well, since
> because we piggy-back on GRANDPA there is no ambiguity in terms of the fork validators should be
> voting for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On top of this, voting on an incorrect **payload** is considered a misbehavior as well, and since we piggy-back on GRANDPA there is no ambiguity in terms of the fork that validators should be
voting for.
```

Misbehavior should be penalized. If more validators misbehave in the exact same `round` the penalty

> should be more severe, up to the entire bonded stake in case we reach `2/3rd + 1` misbehaving

Reviewer: should this be `1/3`? Can we handle more than `1/3` dishonest validators?

Author: Yes, you're right.

about the last session that contains a concluded round on mandatory block in order to initiate the
catch up procedure.

### Gossip

Nodes participating in BEEFY protocol are expected to gossip messages around. The protocol defines
following messages:

1. Votes for the current round,
2. BEEFY Justifications for recently concluded rounds,
3. BEEFY Justification for the latest mandatory block,

Each message is additionally associated with a **topic**, which can be either:
1. the round number (i.e. topic associated with a particular round),
2. or the global topic (independent from the rounds).

Round-specific topic should only be used to gossip the votes, other messages are gossiped
periodically on the global topic. Let's now dive into description of the messages.

- **Votes**
  - Votes are sent on the round-specific topic.
  - Vote is considered valid when:
    - The commitment matches local commitment.
    - The validator is part of the current validator set.
    - The signature is correct.

- **BEEFY Justification**
  - Justifications are sent on the global topic.
  - Justification is considered valid when:

>     - It is for a recent (implementation specific) round or the latest mandatory round.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - It is for a recent (implementation specific) round or a mandatory round.
```
?

Author: Well, here I've rather meant "valid" in terms of "worthwhile to gossip", indeed we can have some old justification that is valid, but we shouldn't be gossiping it (hence "recent round" and "the latest mandatory round"). I've rephrased in the doc as well.

    - It has at least `2/3rd + 1` valid signatures.

>     - Signatorees are part of the current validator set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Signatorees are part of the validator set pertaining to the active session in respective round.
```

Author: Again, since this section defines the gossip, I'd rather narrow this down to usefulness in the latest view of the BEEFY state.

should be more severe, up to the entire bonded stake in case we reach `1/3rd + 1` validators
misbehaving.

<details>
<summary>Open questions</summary>

// TODO [ToDr] Penalization formula.
// TODO [ToDr] If there are misbehaving validators in GRANDPA should we penalize them twice?
IMHO yes, cause they should be relying on GRANDPA finality proof, not just the votes.

</details>

# Implementation

TODO

- What if grandpa < beefy?
- Missing mandatory blocks
- Extra assumptions and consequences (session start block selection) [Lean BEEFY]

///
When we start the worker, we should:
1. Ask the Client for the Best BEEFY block
   (TODO: what if we don't have that API?)
2. Traverse up to "Session Length" number of blocks forward to find a session transition.
3. Figure out if we need to vote on the mandatory block of the next session
   (i.e. we are doing BEEFY Catch-up)
4. or if we can follow the power-of-two rule.

With LEAN BEEFY:
1. Start with Best GRANDPA block
2. Traverse up to "Session Length" number of blocks backwards to find the session start block.
3. ASSUME this block is BEEFY-finalized, even though we haven't seen BEEFY Justification.

> //TODO [ToDr] How to figure out the `session_start` block?

Reviewer: PR https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/10669 implement `current_session_start_block_num` storage for session pallet. That should work fine, right?
